Computer Vision Project
Winter Term 2025/26
Thomas Gorges, Vincent Christlein, Mathias Seuret,
Thomas Köhler, Mathias Zinnen, Tobias Koch

Sheet 4, starting from December 08, 2025, due January 12, 2026

The goal of this project is to develop a basic face recognition system. The system can be trained
from facial data and is able to (re-)identify faces in video data. We cover techniques from supervised
and unsupervised learning. The supplementary material contains a skeleton of that system along with
training and test datasets. The system comprises two parts:

     • Training: The training module (training.py) allows us to capture videos and to extract facial
       data (Exercise 4.1). Our training supports an identification mode to collect labeled training data
       (faces of known identity) for face identification (Exercise 4.2) and a clustering mode to acquire
       unlabeled data (faces without identity label) for re-identification (Exercise 4.3). After completing
       the training, the respective model (identification or clustering, depending on the mode) is stored
       to use it during testing. Figure 1 depicts training on an example face.

     • Testing: The testing module (test.py) uses the trained models either for face identification
       (identification mode) or re-identification (clustering mode) and visualizes our results. Figure 2
       depicts both tasks for an example video.

This exercise will guide you through the implementation of our face recognition system. Please refer to
the documentation of the skeleton for additional hints and details. You may use the provided datasets
extracted from the popular YouTube Faces database1 to train and test the system. Notice that the
test datasets contains faces of human subjects not included in the training set. In addition, you can
capture a live video with a webcam and the OpenCV VideoCapture instance to evaluate the system.

Mandatory Setup

     • Extract the zip archive. Set up your Python environment with version ≥ 3.9.2, recommended
       is ∼=3.10. Install the requirements, see requirements.txt, other packages are not permit-
       ted. The scikit-learn (sklearn) package is only allowed in the last individual exercise (the
       challenge).

     • The config in config.py should automatically take care of all relevant filepaths. However, if the
       files are not found for some reason, you can change them there.




 1
     http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/~wolf/ytfaces/




                                                     1
     Figure 1: Training of our face recognition system (supporting face identification and clustering).


Exercise 4.1: Face Detection, Tracking, and Alignment


We implement some preprocessing algorithms for video-based face recognition. This comprises detec-
tion, tracking, and alignment methods. The face_detector module contains a FaceDetector class
for these tasks. The detect_face method determines the largest face bounding box in an image
using the Multi-task Convolutional Neural Network (MTCNN) of Kaipeng Zhang2 . The align_face
method performs alignment by cropping and normalizing faces to a fixed size (224 × 224 pixel).

a) Tracking Faces in Videos

Face detection in videos could be performed frame-by-frame using MTCNN which is, however, com-
putationally demanding. We can track face movements over time to accelerate the detection.

Implement the track_face method that takes an input frame and tracks the face position relative to
an initial detection in a reference frame using template matching. In template matching, we locate
the position of a template (i. e., face bounding box) in a new frame by searching for the position with
maximum similarity to the reference for a given similarity measure.

     1. Use the first frame of a video to detect a face using detect_face. Capture the detection as a
        reference for template matching.

     2. Use template matching to track the face in new frames. Limit the search window to small
        rectangular regions (e. g., reference bounding box ± 25 pixels at each side) centered at the face
        position in the reference to speed-up template matching under the assumption of small motions.

        Use matchTemplate with minMaxLoc from OpenCV. Find out and understand which matching
        mode works best for you.

     3. Template matching is sensitive to extreme head pose variations and requires a re-initialization
        if the track is lost. Identify some example limitations. Re-initialize your tracker using MTCNN
        and update the reference detection (replacing initial face detection by the new detection) if the
        template matching response falls below a certain threshold or exceeds it.

     4. Test your tracker. Understand and adjust the parameters (window size and similarity threshold).

b) Alignment for Pose Normalization

We use an alignment step to normalize the sizes of detected face bounding boxes before extracting
features from a face. Integrate the alignment to your tracking algorithm.
 2
     MTCNN Python package available at https://pypi.org/project/mtcnn/




                                                      2
Figure 2: Face identification (left) and re-identification (right) for k = 2 classes/clusters. Identification
          aims at predicting the identity of a face using labeled training data (gallery). The posterior
          probability and the distance to a best matching gallery item are computed along with the
          predicted label. Re-identification retrieves the closest cluster using clustering of unlabeled
          faces. For a given face, the distribution of the distances to different clusters can be computed.


Exercise 4.2: Face Identification and Verification


Next, we develop face identification and verification using our detection, tracking, and alignment imple-
mented in the first exercise. The face_recognition module contains FaceNet to extract deep features
aka. embeddings from aligned faces using a convolutional neural network (CNN). The FaceRecognizer
class provides functionality for predicting the identity of a subject in an image using these embeddings.
The gallery is assembled by collecting and labeling faces in video frames.

We approach identification with a distance-based method in the space of face embeddings. Given two
faces represented by the embeddings3 x1 and x2 , we define their distance in the Euclidean space by:
                                              d(x1 , x2 ) = ||x1 − x2 ||2 ,                                            (1)
where we assume that ||x1 ||2 = ||x2 ||2 = 1.

a) Extracting Deep Features

The FaceNet class extracts 128-dimensional normalized embeddings from aligned faces using a ResNet-50
neural network architecture trained on the MS-Celeb-1M dataset followed by fine-tuning on the
VGGFace2 dataset. It is parameterized by an ONNX model file describing the ResNet-50 along
with its pre-trained parameters4 . The ONNX file is included using the OpenCV Deep Neural Network
Module. Integrate the FaceNet class for feature extraction in your recognizer.

b) Closed-Set Protocol

First, we implement face identification under a closed-set protocol. In this situation, all identities
(labels) that are used for testing are also contained in the gallery, i. e., they are known during training.
We use k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) for classification. Reminder: sklearn is not allowed here.

     1. Implement the partial_fit method that takes a new aligned face of known class from a video,
        extracts its embedding, and stores it as a training sample in the gallery.

     2. Implement the predict method that assigns a class label to an aligned face using k-NN. That is,
 3
   Since all functions for face recognition are implemented in the space of embeddings, we use the terms face and embedding
    interchangeable in the remainder of the exercise.
 4
   Trained models are publicly available at https://github.com/ox-vgg/vgg_face2




                                                            3
         the label is determined by taking the majority of the k nearest neighbors in the embedding space.
         You can employ pair-wise distance calculations and brute-force search to implement k-NN.

     3. Extend the predict method by returning the posterior probability p(Ci |x) that a face x falls
        into class Ci , i = 1, . . . , C given C classes in the gallery. If ki ≤ k neighbors among the k nearest
        neighbors belong to class Ci , the posterior probability can be approximated by:
                                                                 ki
                                                    p(Ci |x) =      .                                        (2)
                                                                 k

     4. Extend the predict method by returning the distance of the face x to the predicted class Ci .
        Specifically, compute the distance d(Ci |x) = min(d(x, x1 ), . . . , d(x, xki )) of the ki ≤ k neighbors
        x1 , . . . , xki that belong to the predicted class Ci .

     5. Train the face identification with different persons. Test the identification and adjust the pa-
        rameters of the k-NN classifier (number of neighbors k).

     6. In addition to simple baseline tests (e. g., identification from frontal views), try to challenge your
        algorithm and investigate its robustness. Some examples are:

           • Profile views (yaw angle ≥ 30◦ )

           • Variations in facial expression (mouth opening or occlusion of face regions)

           • Variations in illumination

     7. Extend the partial_fit method by storing two embeddings from the new aligned face. One
        from the color (BGR) face image and one from the grayscale version of the same image5 . Note
        that FaceNet always expects three channels.

     8. Extend the predict method by considering two embeddings for the prediction of the query
        image. Again, one for the color image and one for the grayscale image. Find a way to use both
        embeddings for the prediction, posterior probability, and distance. Challenge your algorithm as
        in step 6.

c) Open-Set Protocol

In the open-set protocol, face identification can be confronted with faces of persons not contained in
the gallery. We need to assign an ‘unknown’ label to such faces instead of simply using the k-NN rule.
To this end, the threshold nearest neighbor approach is used.

     1. Implement the decision rule for open-set identification of a given face x: If the distance d(Ci |x)
        is above the threshold τd or the posterior probability p(Ci |x) is below the threshold τp , predict
        ‘unknown’. Otherwise, predict the class label according to k-NN.

     2. Test the face identification with several unknown persons not contained in the gallery. Find
        suitable thresholds for open-set identification.

     3. Investigate the influence of the decision rule to detect unknowns. Is it suﬀicient to use the
        posterior probability or the distance threshold as a single criterion?




 5
     For color conversion, see https://docs.opencv.org/4.10.0/de/d25/imgproc_color_conversions.html.




                                                        4
Exercise 4.3: Face Clustering


In this exercise, we investigate unsupervised techniques for face recognition. The goal is to enable a
person re-identification instead of simply predicting an identity from a labeled gallery. We approach
this task by clustering faces in videos according to their identity without manual labeling. This
functionality should be provided by the FaceClustering class.

a) k-Means Clustering

The k-means clustering algorithm is one of the simplest methods to cluster feature vectors into k ≥ 2
clusters. See the lecture slides for details on this algorithm. The clustering is performed in the space
of embeddings predicted by FaceNet. Reminder: sklearn is not allowed here.

  1. Implement the partial_fit method that extracts and stores an embedding for a new face. The
     partial fit is similar to managing the gallery for face identification but does not include class
     labels.

  2. Implement the k-means algorithm and integrate it to the fit method. For calculating the initial
     cluster centers, choose k embeddings of the input data at random. Store the estimated cluster
     centers and the labels assigned to the faces.

  3. Depict the value of the k-means objective function over the iterations (use a diagram or table)
     and analyze the convergence behavior of your implementation on several test sets. How sensitive
     is the clustering with respect to the initialization?

b) Person Re-Identification

Once the clustering is done, we can re-identify a face by finding its best matching cluster. We develop
the re-identification with a closed-set protocol.

  1. Implement the predict method. To this end, compute the distribution of distances dx =
     (d(c1 , x), . . . , d(ck , x))⊤ , where ci is the i-th cluster center and x is a face in embedding space.

  2. The best matching cluster j has the smallest distance between its center and a given face, i. e.
     j = arg mini d(ci , x). Return the best matching cluster j and the distribution of distances dx .

  3. Collect facial data from k ≥ 2 persons and test your re-identification algorithm.




                                                     5
Exercise 4.4: Evaluation of Face Recognition


This exercise aims at evaluating open-set face identification using detection and identification rate
(DIR) curves. The DIR curve describes the performance of an identification system as a tradeoff
between erroneously recognized unknown (false alarms) and the identification of knowns. The supple-
mentary material contains a skeleton and data for this evaluation.

The files evaluation_train_data.pkl and evaluation_test_data.pkl form a training and a test
dataset, respectively. Each dataset comprises embeddings and corresponding identity labels. The
dir_curve.py script imports both datasets, feeds them into an OpenSetEvaluation instance, and
plots a DIR curve from evaluation results.

This evaluation is conducted for a nearest neighbor classifier (classifier.py), which provides a fit
method to learn a model from training data and a predict_labels_and_similarities method to
classify test data. A similarity is obtained by negating the distance of a probe embedding to its nearest
neighbor in the gallery (see lecture slides).

Your task is to complete the evaluation by implementing the run method.

   1. Implement the calc_identification_rate method that takes a set of predicted class labels as
      input, compares them to the target labels, and computes the identification rate at rank 1.

   2. Implement the select_similarity_threshold to determine a threshold from predicted simi-
      larities such that open-set identification on the test data yields a given false alarm rate.

      Hint: You can find the desired threshold by considering the p-percentile (np.percentile) of the
      similarities, where p is related to the false alarm rate.

   3. Implement the run method according to the following algorithm:

        • Fit the classifier on the training data.

        • Predict similarities on the test data.

        • For each false alarm rate, find a similarity threshold that yields this false alarm rate on the
          test data and compute the corresponding identification rate.

        • Return all false alarm rates, identification rates, and similarity thresholds.

   4. The DIR curve allows us to select parameters for a face identifications system. Find suitable
      similarity thresholds from the DIR curve under the following requirements:

        • The false alarm rate should not exceed 1 % and the identification rate should be maximized.

        • The identification rate should not fall below 90 % and false alarms should be minimized.




                                                     6
Exercise 4.5: Additional Exercise – Face Recognition Challenge


This exercise poses a challenge on developing an own open-set face recognition method using learning
with known classes (KCs) and known unknown classes (KUCs). We employ two of the open-set
training strategies presented in the lecture: single pseudo label (SPL) and multi pseudo label (MPL).
Both approaches can use a closed-set classifier as a backbone to form open-set models. For additional
background please refer to the respective scientific publication6 .

The file challenge_train_data.csv includes validation data with 128-dimensional feature vectors
and class labels for 1680 subjects (610 KCs and 1070 KUCs). Class labels −1 denote KUCs and labels
≥ 0 are KCs. Notice that the underlying feature extraction method is hidden and no input images
are provided.

We will develop open-set recognition based on challenge_train_data.csv. You are free to adopt any
estimator from sklearn as a backbone for SPL and MPL. Alternatively you can implement an own
estimator. Feel free to use any additional pattern recognition tricks if desired, e. g., for pre-processing,
feature transforms, data generation, etc. Use the templates of spl_training and mpl_training in
osr_learning.py. Submit your osr_learning.py with the solutions of this exercise.

We will benchmark your submissions on a hidden test set based on the same feature extraction. The
test set comprises images of the same 610 KCs and 1070 KUCs but captured under different intrinsic
(pose, facial hair etc.) and extrinsic conditions (illumination, image quality, etc.). In addition, there
are images of 4096 subjects not contained in the validation data referred to as unknown unknown
classes (UUCs). Benchmarking will be done according to:

      • Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUCROC)

      • DIR@FAR=1 % and DIR@FAR=10 %

      • Balanced rank-1 identification rate (average rank-1 ID over each KC)

      • Average computation time per sample to obtain a prediction

      • Computation time to fit your models

The best, second-best, and third-best method will gain 3, 2, and 1 point, respectively. The overall score
of your method will be done by computing the sum over all categories, i. e., you obtain a maximum of
18 points. Everyone participates with two implementations (SPL and MPL) and both will be tested
together within a single track.

      1. Implement SPL and design a backbone classifier (function spl_training).

         Hint: If you decide to use a sklearn classifier as backbone, consider the optimization of its
         hyperparameters under the performance measures of this challenge. Avoid overfitting on your
         validation data since benchmarking will be done one a hidden test set.

      2. Implement MPL and design a backbone classifier (function mpl_training). Notice that you can
         either re-use the same backbone as for SPL or use a different backbone. Hint: Not all classifiers
         can handle the increasing number of classes for MPL. Use a backbone that is computationally
         eﬀicient for multi-class problems with large number of KCs und KUCs.

      3. Ensure that the tests in test_osr_learning.py pass. Otherwise, we may not be able to evaluate
         your participation in the competition.


 6
     Koch, T., Riess, C., & Köhler, T. (2023). LORD: Leveraging Open-Set Recognition with Unknown Data. In Proceed-
      ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 4386–4396).




                                                          7
